README.md, before:

# analisi: your Swiss Army Knife of molecular dynamics analysis

Fastest possible example usage:

## command line

- mean square displacement
```
./analisi -i tests/lammps.bin -Q > output_file
```

- spherical harmonics correlation functions
```
./analisi -i tests/lammps.bin -Y 4 -F 0.7 3.5 > output_file
```

- g(r), with time lags too
```
./analisi -i tests/lammps.bin -g 200 -F 0.7 3.5 > output_file
```

- green kubo autocorrelation integrals 
```
./analisi -l tests/gk_integral.txt -H -a 'c_flux[1]' 'c_vcm[1][1]' > output_file
```

many others...

## python

```
#read trajectory
import numpy as np
pos = np.load( 'tests/data/positions.npy')
vel = np.load( 'tests/data/velocities.npy')
box = np.load( 'tests/data/cells.npy')
types = np.zeros(pos.shape[1], dtype = np.int32)
types[-16:-8]=1
types[-8:]=2
print('position array shape is {}'.format(pos.shape))
print('first cell matrix is {}'.format(box[0]))

#create trajectory object
import pyanalisi
analisi_traj = pyanalisi.Trajectory(pos, vel, types, box,True, False)

#do the calculation that you want
msd=pyanalisi.MeanSquareDisplacement(analisi_traj,10,4000,4,True,False,False)
msd.reset(3000)
msd.calculate(0)

result=np.array(msd,copy=False)


#other calculations
#...
#...

```

Heat transport coefficient calculation: correlation functions and gk integral for a multicomponent fluid example
```
import numpy as np
with open(filepath_tests + '/data/gk_integral.dat', 'r') as flog:
    headers = flog.readline().split()
log = np.loadtxt(filepath_tests + '/data/gk_integral.dat', skiprows=1)

import pyanalisi
traj = pyanalisi.ReadLog(log, headers)
gk = pyanalisi.GreenKubo(analisi_log,'',1,['c_flux[1]','c_vcm[1][1]'], False, 2000, 2,False,0,4,False,1,100)
gk.reset(analisi_log.getNtimesteps()-2000)
gk.calculate(0)
result = np.array(gk,copy=False)

```

## note

If you use this program and you like it, spread the word around and give it credits! Implementing stuff that is already implemented can be a waste of time. And why don't you try to implement something that you like inside it? You will get for free MPI parallelization and variance calculation, that are already implemented in a very generic and abstracted way.

# Description


Features:

 - python interface (reads numpy array)
 - command line interface (reads binary lammps-like files)
 - multithreaded
 - command line interface has MPI too (for super-heavy calculations)
 - command line calculates variance of every quantity and every function (in python you can do it by yourselves with numpy.var )

Calculations:

- g of r ( and time too!)
- vibrational spectrum (this is nothing special)
- histogram of number of neighbours
- mean square displacement
- green kubo integral of currents
- multicomponent green kubo time domain formula (MPI here can be useful...)
- spherical harmonics number density time correlation analysis
- and more ...
- ...

# Building from source
Dependencies:

- C++17 capable compiler
- linux (mmap)
- FFTW3 (not included)
- Eigen3 (included in the package)
- Boost (included in the package)
- Mpi (optional)
- libxdrfile (for gromacs file conversion -- optional)
- python (optional) 

## MPI build (why not?)
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ../ -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=mpicxx -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=mpicc -DUSE_MPI=ON
make
```
## non-MPI build (shame on you!)
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ../
make
```

# Documentation

## MSD
 TODO

## GreenKubo
 TODO

## g(r,t)
 TODO

## Spherical harmonics correlations
### Calculation procedure:
The implemented formula for the real spherical harmonics is the following:
$$
Y_{\ell m} =
\begin{cases}
 \displaystyle (-1)^m\sqrt{2} \sqrt{{2\ell+1 \over 4\pi}{(\ell-|m|)!\over (\ell+|m|)!}} \ 
 P_\ell^{|m|}(\cos \theta) \ \sin( |m|\varphi )  
 &\mbox{if } m<0 
 \\
 \displaystyle \sqrt{{ 2\ell+1 \over 4\pi}} \ P_\ell^m(\cos \theta) 
 & \mbox{if } m=0 
 \\
 \displaystyle (-1)^m\sqrt{2} \sqrt{{2\ell+1 \over 4\pi}{(\ell-m)!\over (\ell+m)!}} \ 
 P_\ell^m(\cos \theta) \ \cos( m\varphi )
 & \mbox{if } m>0 \,.
\end{cases}
$$
Where $\cos \theta$, $\sin \varphi$, $\cos \varphi$ are calculated using cartesian components:
$$
\cos \theta = \frac{z}{\sqrt{x^2+y^2+z^2}}  \\
\cos \varphi = \frac{x}{\sqrt{x^2+y^2}}  \\ 
\sin \varphi = \frac{y}{\sqrt{x^2+y^2}} \\
$$
and $\sin |m|\varphi$, $\cos |m|\varphi$ are evaluated using Chebyshev polynomials with a recursive definition:
$$
\begin{cases}
\cos m \varphi &= 2 \cos (m-1)\varphi \cos \varphi - \cos (m-2)\varphi \\
\sin m \varphi &= 2 \cos \varphi \sin (m-1)\varphi - \sin (m-2)\varphi \\
\end{cases}
$$
and $P_\ell^m$ are the associated Legendre polynomials, calculated with the following set of recursive definition:
$$
P_{\ell +1}^{\ell +1}(x) = - (2\ell+1) \sqrt{1-x^2} P_{\ell}^{\ell}(x) \\
P_{\ell +1}^{\ell}(x) = x (2\ell+1) P_{\ell}^{\ell}(x) \\
$$
that allows us to calculate every $(\ell,\ell)$ and every $(\ell,\ell+1)$ element of the $(\ell,m)$ values. Then we have the recursion to go up in $\ell$, for any value of it:
$$
P^m_{\ell} = \frac{x(2\ell - 1)P^m_{\ell-1} - (\ell + m - 1)P^m_{\ell-2}}{\ell - m}
$$

The program, given a number $\ell_{max}$ and a triplet $(x,y,z)$, is able to calculate every value of $Y_{\ell m}(x,y,z) \forall \ell \in [0,\ell_{max}]$ and for all allowed values of $m$ with a single recursion. Let
$$
y_{\ell m}^{I j}(t) = \int_{V_I} \mathrm{d}\theta\mathrm{d}\varphi\mathrm{d}r \rho^j(r,\theta,\varphi,t) Y_{\ell m}(\theta,\varphi)
$$
for some timestep $t$ in some volume $V_I$ taken as a the difference of two concentric spheres centered on the atom $I$ of radius $r_{inner}$ and $r_{outer}$, and where $\rho_j$ is the atomic density of the species $j$. Since the densities are taken as sums of dirac delta functions, it is sufficient to evaluate the spherical harmonics functions at the position of the atoms.
Then we calculate the following:
$$
c_\ell^{Jj}(t)=\langle \frac{1}{N_J}\sum_{I \text{ is of type } J}\sum_{m=-\ell}^{\ell} y_{\ell m}^{I j}(0) y_{\ell m}^{I j}(t) \rangle
$$
where $\langle \cdot \rangle$ is an average operator, and we do an additional average over all the $N_J$ central atoms of the type $J$. The $\langle \cdot \rangle$ average is implemented as an average over the starting timestep.

### Library interface
 TODO

# Credits
Written by Riccardo Bertossa during his lifetime at SISSA

Commit message:

included fftw3 dependency, added option to not use python in any way

README.md, after:

# analisi: your Swiss Army Knife of molecular dynamics analysis

Fastest possible example usage:

## command line

- mean square displacement
```
./analisi -i tests/lammps.bin -Q > output_file
```

- spherical harmonics correlation functions
```
./analisi -i tests/lammps.bin -Y 4 -F 0.7 3.5 > output_file
```

- g(r), with time lags too
```
./analisi -i tests/lammps.bin -g 200 -F 0.7 3.5 > output_file
```

- green kubo autocorrelation integrals 
```
./analisi -l tests/gk_integral.txt -H -a 'c_flux[1]' 'c_vcm[1][1]' > output_file
```

many others...

## python

```
#read trajectory
import numpy as np
pos = np.load( 'tests/data/positions.npy')
vel = np.load( 'tests/data/velocities.npy')
box = np.load( 'tests/data/cells.npy')
types = np.zeros(pos.shape[1], dtype = np.int32)
types[-16:-8]=1
types[-8:]=2
print('position array shape is {}'.format(pos.shape))
print('first cell matrix is {}'.format(box[0]))

#create trajectory object
import pyanalisi
analisi_traj = pyanalisi.Trajectory(pos, vel, types, box,True, False)

#do the calculation that you want
msd=pyanalisi.MeanSquareDisplacement(analisi_traj,10,4000,4,True,False,False)
msd.reset(3000)
msd.calculate(0)

result=np.array(msd,copy=False)


#other calculations
#...
#...

```

Heat transport coefficient calculation: correlation functions and gk integral for a multicomponent fluid example
```
import numpy as np
with open(filepath_tests + '/data/gk_integral.dat', 'r') as flog:
    headers = flog.readline().split()
log = np.loadtxt(filepath_tests + '/data/gk_integral.dat', skiprows=1)

import pyanalisi
traj = pyanalisi.ReadLog(log, headers)
gk = pyanalisi.GreenKubo(analisi_log,'',1,['c_flux[1]','c_vcm[1][1]'], False, 2000, 2,False,0,4,False,1,100)
gk.reset(analisi_log.getNtimesteps()-2000)
gk.calculate(0)
result = np.array(gk,copy=False)

```

## note

If you use this program and you like it, spread the word around and give it credits! Implementing stuff that is already implemented can be a waste of time. And why don't you try to implement something that you like inside it? You will get for free MPI parallelization and variance calculation, that are already implemented in a very generic and abstracted way.

# Description


Features:

 - python interface (reads numpy array)
 - command line interface (reads binary lammps-like files)
 - multithreaded
 - command line interface has MPI too (for super-heavy calculations)
 - command line calculates variance of every quantity and every function (in python you can do it by yourselves with numpy.var )

Calculations:

- g of r ( and time too!)
- vibrational spectrum (this is nothing special)
- histogram of number of neighbours
- mean square displacement
- green kubo integral of currents
- multicomponent green kubo time domain formula (MPI here can be useful...)
- spherical harmonics number density time correlation analysis
- and more ...
- ...

# Building from source
Dependencies:

- C++17 capable compiler
- linux (mmap)
- FFTW3 (included in the package)
- Eigen3 (included in the package)
- Boost (included in the package)
- Mpi (optional)
- libxdrfile (for gromacs file conversion -- optional)
- python (optional) 

If you want to use system's fftw3 library, you have to provide to cmake the option:
```
-DSYSTEM_FFTW3=ON
```
If you don't want any python interface you have to provide to cmake the option:
```
-DPYTHON_INTERFACE=OFF
```

## MPI build (why not?)
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ../ -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=mpicxx -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=mpicc -DUSE_MPI=ON
make
```
## non-MPI build (shame on you!)
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ../
make
```

# Documentation

## MSD
 TODO

## GreenKubo
 TODO

## g(r,t)
 TODO

## Spherical harmonics correlations
### Calculation procedure:
The implemented formula for the real spherical harmonics is the following:
$$
Y_{\ell m} =
\begin{cases}
 \displaystyle (-1)^m\sqrt{2} \sqrt{{2\ell+1 \over 4\pi}{(\ell-|m|)!\over (\ell+|m|)!}} \ 
 P_\ell^{|m|}(\cos \theta) \ \sin( |m|\varphi )  
 &\mbox{if } m<0 
 \\
 \displaystyle \sqrt{{ 2\ell+1 \over 4\pi}} \ P_\ell^m(\cos \theta) 
 & \mbox{if } m=0 
 \\
 \displaystyle (-1)^m\sqrt{2} \sqrt{{2\ell+1 \over 4\pi}{(\ell-m)!\over (\ell+m)!}} \ 
 P_\ell^m(\cos \theta) \ \cos( m\varphi )
 & \mbox{if } m>0 \,.
\end{cases}
$$
Where $\cos \theta$, $\sin \varphi$, $\cos \varphi$ are calculated using cartesian components:
$$
\cos \theta = \frac{z}{\sqrt{x^2+y^2+z^2}}  \\
\cos \varphi = \frac{x}{\sqrt{x^2+y^2}}  \\ 
\sin \varphi = \frac{y}{\sqrt{x^2+y^2}} \\
$$
and $\sin |m|\varphi$, $\cos |m|\varphi$ are evaluated using Chebyshev polynomials with a recursive definition:
$$
\begin{cases}
\cos m \varphi &= 2 \cos (m-1)\varphi \cos \varphi - \cos (m-2)\varphi \\
\sin m \varphi &= 2 \cos \varphi \sin (m-1)\varphi - \sin (m-2)\varphi \\
\end{cases}
$$
and $P_\ell^m$ are the associated Legendre polynomials, calculated with the following set of recursive definition:
$$
P_{\ell +1}^{\ell +1}(x) = - (2\ell+1) \sqrt{1-x^2} P_{\ell}^{\ell}(x) \\
P_{\ell +1}^{\ell}(x) = x (2\ell+1) P_{\ell}^{\ell}(x) \\
$$
that allows us to calculate every $(\ell,\ell)$ and every $(\ell,\ell+1)$ element of the $(\ell,m)$ values. Then we have the recursion to go up in $\ell$, for any value of it:
$$
P^m_{\ell} = \frac{x(2\ell - 1)P^m_{\ell-1} - (\ell + m - 1)P^m_{\ell-2}}{\ell - m}
$$

The program, given a number $\ell_{max}$ and a triplet $(x,y,z)$, is able to calculate every value of $Y_{\ell m}(x,y,z) \forall \ell \in [0,\ell_{max}]$ and for all allowed values of $m$ with a single recursion. Let
$$
y_{\ell m}^{I j}(t) = \int_{V_I} \mathrm{d}\theta\mathrm{d}\varphi\mathrm{d}r \rho^j(r,\theta,\varphi,t) Y_{\ell m}(\theta,\varphi)
$$
for some timestep $t$ in some volume $V_I$ taken as a the difference of two concentric spheres centered on the atom $I$ of radius $r_{inner}$ and $r_{outer}$, and where $\rho_j$ is the atomic density of the species $j$. Since the densities are taken as sums of dirac delta functions, it is sufficient to evaluate the spherical harmonics functions at the position of the atoms.
Then we calculate the following:
$$
c_\ell^{Jj}(t)=\langle \frac{1}{N_J}\sum_{I \text{ is of type } J}\sum_{m=-\ell}^{\ell} y_{\ell m}^{I j}(0) y_{\ell m}^{I j}(t) \rangle
$$
where $\langle \cdot \rangle$ is an average operator, and we do an additional average over all the $N_J$ central atoms of the type $J$. The $\langle \cdot \rangle$ average is implemented as an average over the starting timestep.

### Library interface
 TODO

# Credits
Written by Riccardo Bertossa during his lifetime at SISSA
